Almost 30 years ago, I started medical
school in Edinburgh in Scotland. And I
still remember sitting in the anatomy
theater, being told by one of our
professors that one in four of us at
some point in our lives were going to
get cancer. And I remember being
shocked. This was back in 1995.
I looked around thinking, "Wow, one in
four." Now I know as things stand today
that rate has gone up to one in two of
us are going to get cancer at some point
in our lives. So Professor Seafood,
you've been studying cancer for decades
now. In your view, what's going on?
>> Well, thanks. Um well, you know, in any
kind of a a disastrous situation,
um there's never one thing that could be
responsible uh for the rise in in in a
particular disease. I I think that um
there are many factors that come
together
uh to account in part for this worldwide
epidemic of cancer. uh where most people
uh that study epidemiology
have now uh consider the view that it's
just a matter of time before cancer
overtakes heart disease a as the number
one killer of people in various
countries. So what what's going on? Uh
when you consider that our ancestral
uh groups of people um cancer was
extremely rare in uh and tribes and and
and different populations that lived by
their standard ways uh ways that were
common to those folks for for centuries.
All of a sudden now we have this
explosion within the last say 50 or 70
years an explosion of of cancer and a
lot of it has to do with our western
civilization diet and lifestyle. We we
have more contaminants in the
atmosphere. We have less exercise and we
have far more foods that are poorly
nutritious and provide uh high amounts
of carbohydrates. I I think you put all
this together because there's a direct
correlation between the obesity epidemic
and cancer. Uh a correlation between the
obesity ep epidemic, cancer and type 2
diabetes. You put all this together,
Alzheimer's disease. All these chronic
diseases are on a increased trajectory.
So clearly it's linked to a change in
diet and lifestyle over the last uh 50
to 70 years where we're really starting
to see this this increase. Even even
when we had the anti-smoking campaign
here in the United States in the in the
in the n 1990s, you know, smoking was a
major cause of lung cancer and other
cancers. But now with the uh reduction
of smoking, we're still seeing this
relentless increase. and obesity now is
replacing smoking as the num as a number
one or a major risk factor for the
development of cancer. So I I think it's
a lot of factors coming together uh
increasing our susceptibility to
developing tumors in various uh organ
systems.
>> Yeah, it's really interesting.
One of the ways in which we get trained
as western medical doctors of course is
that
these different diagnosis, these
different illnesses are completely
different diseases, right? We say things
like, oh, you know, this increases your
risk of type two diabetes and if you
have type two diabetes, it increases
your risk of another condition called
Alzheimer's disease. And what's really
interesting hearing you talk about
what's happened in the last well my
question was the last 20 30 years but
you broadened it out to 50 to 70 years
is that it's not just cancer that's
going up as you say we know that chronic
disease is going up type 2 diabetes is
going up Alzheimer's is going up cancer
is going up and I know you have very
much been trying to get the message
across to people for many decades now
that cancer is a metabolic disease so
clearly these things are not quite as
separate as they might initially seem.
>> That's absolutely right. And and um
metabolic homeostasis
uh which is the u u absolute uh
functioning of our cells in the
appropriate way uh organs, cells and
it's called metabolic homeostasis. When
you're basically a very healthy person,
you're in metabolic homeostasis. So
what's happening is our bodies are
falling out of metabolic homeostasis as
the result of a variety of insults from
uh from largely from from the
environment diet and lifestyle and these
kinds of things. But when you look back
and say what is what is um what is
responsible for maintaining what in
metabolic homeostasis and it comes back
to our mitochondria within the cells. um
the organel that uh ultimately is
responsible for the metabolic
homeostasis within individual cells and
within the body as a whole. So this
organel uh when it becomes corrupted or
dysfunctional can manifest
can manifest this problem in in many
different ways. Cardiovascular disease,
type two diabetes, cancer, u Alzheimer's
disease depending on the on the tissue
and the cells of the individual. In
cancer, we we we know for sure that um
every major cancer that I have studied
has defects in the number structure and
function of the of the mitochondria.
>> Yeah.
>> And this then causes the cells to fall
back on a on a primitive form of energy
which is fermentation
>> and that leads to disregulated cell
growth. So we have I I have a very clear
idea of the origin of cancer and how to
manage it. um the ramifications of these
to say other chronic diseases um we
always find a mitochondrial connection.
It may not be always the same as what we
see in cancer.
>> Yeah. Well, let's just go initially to
something you you you mentioned at the
start of this conversation which is when
we look at
these kind of indigenous populations we
don't see cancer.
Now, some people may be thinking, okay,
but how much are we, you know, examining
these people? How much are we scanning
these people? So, do we know for sure
that actually they don't have rates of
cancer, or is it just that we haven't
found it? So, I wonder if you could just
address that right at the top.
>> Yeah. Well, that's a good question, but
um when when we read the the work of um
the humanitarian physician Albert
Schwitzer, uh he he definitely knew what
cancer was. He examined 40,000 Africans
and living in their natural ways looking
for cancer and he didn't find it. So uh
so he absolutely knew in other cases
with the in init of Alaska and the
Arctic Circle some um British physicians
reported that cancer was very very rare
but I don't think it was done as
comprehensively as what Albert
Schweitzer did in the African
populations but others have looked as
well and they kind of con uh concur what
Schweitzer had seen in general uh human
populations that lived according to
tradition traditional ways had a much
lower incidence of cancer than those
same populations that shifted to diet
lifestyle. For example, the Inouits. I I
had the opportunity to visit uh the
medical school at Thunder Bay, Canada,
uh where they uh they um uh service the
the medical problems of the Canadian
Inouit population. And the inuits now
are are are raked with uh diabetes,
cancer, dementia, uh which their
ancestral populations never had. So uh
um clearly it's the change in diet and
lifestyle that's largely responsible for
the onset of these chronic uh diseases
uh including cancer.
If you want to learn how to implement
the ketogenic diet and the press pulse
protocol into your cancer management,
just visit school.com/ keto for cancer,
the new community by our research
analyst, Johnny Rockermeer. Within this
new community platform, you can connect
with other patients and learn from their
experiences.
You can also just search through the
posts other members have already made.
You will have access to our classroom
section as well, which provides
practical advice and tools for the best
results. These sections cover all parts
of the press pulse protocol that you
should implement. Starting with the
general scientific concepts by Dr.
Thomas Ciphford, we will show you how to
start the ketogenic diet, including
which foods to choose and which to
avoid. Additionally, we prepared a list
of doctors specialized in metabolic
therapy as well as details about
glutamine inhibition and hyperbaric
oxygen protocols.
So, take a look around at school.com/
keto for cancer.
I've heard you say in a previous
interview that our bodies are actually
very resistant to cancer. And I've been
thinking about that a lot over the past
few days that despite all the insults
that are coming into our bodies,
especially these days, although the
rates are high, you could make the case
that the rate should be even higher. So
I guess when you say our bodies are
incredibly resistant to cancer, what do
you kind of mean by that? Well, I I I
think um uh when we live traditional
lives like the primitive folks and
traditional ancestral groups not getting
cancer or having very low uh rates of
cancer um I think when we have the right
diet and lifestyle I I think it becomes
much more difficult for cancer uh to
develop. A kind of an example of this
was that there was a study done some
years ago um with with uh I think they
were Macak some sort of a monkey from
South America or one of these places and
they rubbed carcinogen they 20
methylanthrine is a known carcinogen and
and they rubbed it on the arms of these
monkeys uh for 10 years inject them with
it and everything else and they didn't
get a a single case of cancer uh from
from from these and they concluded that
well these monkeys are not good models
for cancer. Um but the monkeys were
eating their their diet. They were
living in their natural environment. Um
and they were quite resistant. the con
the the alternative experiment which was
never done is why don't we give these
monkeys uh high carbohydrate diets uh
really changed their diet and lifestyle
and then do these kinds of experiments
and and I think that members of our
ancestral groups uh uh having the
correct exercise diet and lifestyle even
even when exposed to carcinogens would
have a much lower risk. Yeah. So when
you take folks that are now uh not
exercising, getting obese, uh you have
you have them exposed to a variety of
chemicals within the food systems, the
type of poor nutrition. I think you even
though we have a lot of resistance in
our body to cancer, we're really we're
really bashing down those walls of
resistance by the diet and lifestyles
that we're taking. Yeah, I really like
that example because I think it goes
beyond cancer for me into all these
chronic diseases. We can scare ourselves
these days if we go online. If we read
about the toxins, the pollutants, the
air pollution, the diesel fumes that
that you know, it can be really really
scary to think, well, what can I do? I'm
going to be exposed to so much of this.
But
>> what you just explained there is really
the approach I take with myself and with
my patients, which is very much, okay,
well, what can you do? Okay, what are
the things you have control over? What
can you do in your own house? And the
more good things you can do, the more of
a buffer you create, the more strong
these foundations become to then resist
the attack and the onslaught from the
modern worlds. As someone who's been
studying cancer for decades now, do you
think that's a a kind of fair analogy?
>> Oh, I think it's a really good analogy.
I I I think I I think uh but it's hard.
You know,
>> it is hard.
>> Uh uh we we are confronted now um with
food sources in abundance. Uh our our
exercise levels are far far lower than
they than they were uh when we evolved
as a species. Um, you know, this this
whole way we live, sitting in traffic in
front of computers,
um, with minimal exercise,
they're chowing down on on on poorly
nutritious, high carbohydrate foods. I
mean, over years, you know, little kids
kids can do this uh because your body is
strong and healthy, but man, you do that
for 30 years and it just it just, you
know, crushes you down.
>> Yeah. Um and so it's a it's a
combination of all these exposures and
the lifestyle that we have and it's it
cuts across
um racial and and different groups. I
mean it clearly it's it's a common it
once that western diet lifestyle enters
into a population all of a sudden you
see the onset of these chronic diseases.
It's very clear.
>> So so that never existed.
>> Yeah.
>> Previous. So you can know, you know what
it is, but what in the diet and
lifestyle specifically is responsible
for one of these chronic diseases? You
know, as you said, they're they're
they're all linked in one way or
another. And that what and that linkage
in my mind has to do with the way we
generate energy within ourselves. And um
uh the consequences of what happens uh
to the body through this chronic assault
year in and year out, decade in decade
out. Yeah, we're going to get into the
details here because I think it's really
important and I I think
certainly for longtime listeners of my
podcast,
I think I hope there's there's a real
awareness that actually the way we live
our lives, the choices we make, the the
behaviors we engage with each and every
day over time, they build up and they
increase our risk or decrease our risk
of getting sick in the future. But we
haven't spoken about cancer that much on
the show so far, which is one of the
reasons why I wanted to speak to you.
And I think you've already so far spoken
about concepts that people are familiar
with, but possibly not familiar with
when looking at cancer, what I mean by
that is just as type 2 diabetes doesn't
happen overnight, you don't just wake up
one morning, go to the doctor, get your
HBA1C
at 6.8, and go, "Oh, wow. What? I don't
know what happened. I I've just got type
two diabetes. No. Things were going on
in your life for maybe 5 to 10 years
that was building up, building up,
building up, and now you've crossed that
threshold. Can we say cancer adopts a a
similar kind of model that you know you
you get the diagnosis at some point, but
things have been building up for a
period of time. I wonder if you could
just expand on that and help us
understand how one actually develops it
in the first place.
>> Yeah. Well, you're right about that. I
mean, it doesn't happen. You don't you
don't wake you don't go to sleep uh
looking healthy at night. Wake up with a
big tumor on on your lung or your kidney
or something like this. I mean, the
these these things when when you have
something that can be obvious now and
detected
uh um by um you know, pathology,
pathological report or non-invasive
imaging. I mean, there's got to be a
large number of disregulated cells in in
that mass uh before you actually uh see
it uh with with some diagnostic tool. Um
but you know when I when I wrote uh my
book on cancer Albert Senorgi
uh who was a Nobel Prize recipient did
work on vitamin C he called he called
this cancer thing the an ankcogenic
paradox. How is it possible that so many
different provocative agents uh could
could elicit a dis a disregulated group
of cells in a particular organ or um
part of the body in a in a common way?
What is the common pathofysiological
connection
uh among all the provocative agents like
we know carcinogens they call chemicals
that cause cancer as carcinogen. This is
a a chemical that has been been
determined to uh cause cancer. So we
refer to these chemicals as carcinogens.
We also know that we have certain viral
infections like hepatitis
uh C papilloma viruses and some of these
other kinds of car uh uh carcinogenic
viruses they produce cancer. Uh we also
know radiation can produce cancer. We
also know that chronic inflammation can
produce cancer. We know that
intermittent hypoxia can produce cancer
in certain cells. What is the common
pathophysiological mechanism by which
all this happens? We know that there are
certain uh uh inherited genes in our
body. These are called secondary risk.
They're not primary risk factors but
they in the right environment they they
will elicit cancer like the leaf ramen
many syndrome. you have the BA 1
mutations for breast cancer. Um, so a
woman might get breast cancer for uh
having a BA 1 mutation. They might get
breast cancer from a clogged milk duct.
Uh they may get cancer from systemic
inflammation. But when you look at it
under the microscope, the pathological
report, they say, "Oh, you have breast
cancer." So what was the origin? Why one
woman, why all these women that would
have various kinds? They might all have
different provocative agents that
elicited uh the the common path. Now
what the common pathophysiological
mechanism mechanism is to all cancers is
a chronic disruption of energy
metabolism in the mitochondria of the
cell followed by a compensatory ferment
fermentation. Now let me break that down
because this is what Otto Warberg
initially said. He just didn't connect
all the dots like we have. He he said
cancer elicits from chronic damage to
the ability of a cell to generate energy
from oxygen. So we know that all of the
cells in our body use oxygen to generate
ATP which is the currency of energy in
our body. Adenosine triphosphate. Okay.
>> Okay.
>> So we you and I are breathing we're
talking uh because the air that we
breathe in has oxygen in it. Oxygen
serves as uh uh the acceptor of
electrons
uh which allows the mitochondria to
produce vast amounts of of energy and
the waste products are CO2 and water of
oxidative phosphorilation. All of our
cells in our body the majority of cells
except red blood cells are using this
process so that we can remain alive.
What happens in the cancer cell over
time that organel that process becomes
corrupted or deficient in some way. But
the but as as Warberg said, if you
disrupt oxidative phosphorilation or
energy through oxygen too acutely, the
cell will die and you'll never get a
cancer from a dead cell. So whatever
causes the cancer, whatever the
provocative agent does, it doesn't do it
acutely, it does it chronically. And by
chronic disruption of oxidative
phosphorilation, it allows the cell to
to replace oxidative phosphorilation
with the ancient pathways of
fermentation. The fermentation pathways
is energy without oxygen. And all the
cells on our planet existed uh in using
fermentation before oxygen came into the
atmosphere and that was about 2.5
billion years ago. So the cancer cell
adapts to a fermentation metabolism as a
way to compensate for the chronic
disruption of oxidative phosphorilation.
Interestingly enough that same organel
the mitochondria controls the cell
cycle. It allows the cell to remain in a
quiescent differentiated state and as
that organel becomes corrupted over time
the transition to fermentation causes
the cell to lapse into the default state
which is proliferation. So in this in
this all of the cells on our planet uh
were highly proliferative disregulated
cell growth before oxygen came into the
atmosphere to form metazoneans and more
complicated complex uh organisms. So the
cancer cell is doing nothing more than
falling back on ancient pathway living
in the living as if it were in the
absence of oxygen. That's what cancer
cells do. They can absolutely survive
without oxygen. They don't use oxygen
anymore. So they're living without
oxygen, anorobosis as Warberg called it,
their life without oxygen. Even when
oxygen is present, the cancer cell is
the cancer cell is still fermenting. So
now you know what this cell is.
>> Yeah, it's so interesting. So let's just
unpack a little bit of what you just
said. First of all, you said that I
guess or my interpretation is that there
are infinite numbers of insults that we
can have on the human body and with
respect to cancer, it can be from
pollution, from radiation, from you know
whatever it might be, we can have these
insults but whatever those insults are
for us to get a diagnosis of cancer
there is a specific abnormality in
mitochondri function which occurs and at
that point the cancer cell is no longer
utilizing oxygen to make energy. It's
doing it using fermentation products and
you're saying that so so if we go down
that logic is it fair to say then that
cancer is not really the diagnosis
cancer is a symptom it's a symptom of
problems in the mitochondria.
>> Yes. Exactly. You're actually right. And
then Warberg had said this and at that
time he only knew about glucose
fermentation, lactic acid fermentation
because ATP synthesis through oxidative
phosphorilation is highly highly
efficient. So you can generate 30 32 to
36 ATP molecules for one mole of oxygen
consumed. But fermentation is a very
inefficient system. So what is the raw
material to generate fermentation? Yes,
glucose. But uh but the glucose can only
generate a couple of ATP relative to the
vast number from oxidative
phosphorilation. So in order to make up
the difference in energy, you have to
take in massive amounts of glucose uh to
in order to replace the energy that you
would have gotten from that the cell
would have received from oxidative
phosphorilation. So consequently the
transporters for the the the sugar
glucose are massively upregulated on the
surface of cancer cells. And this is one
of the reasons why you can detect tumors
using position p scanning
posetron emission tomography. You can
you can you can see cancer because it's
sucking down so much so much uh glucose.
Um but what we have found and Warberg
did not know um we have also discovered
that these same tumor cells also ferment
the amino acid glutamine. So they can
they can use glutamine in the absence of
oxygen in a fermentation mechanism. So
the two fuels the glucose and the
glutamine are the two predominantly the
predominant fuels for fermentation. So
uh uh once you know this once you know
that these tumor cells are dependent on
uh non oxidative energy uh which is
called fermentation energy without
oxygen what what generates because
listen without energy nothing can grow
period energy is absolutely essential
for life. So if the cancer cell is using
a different type of energy metabolism
what is it? It's fermentation. Wow. Okay
great. What are the fuels that are
driving the fermentation? Well, one of
them is glucose as Warberg said and the
other one is glutamine as we have now
found as the second major fermentable
fuel in these tumor cells. And these two
fuels work together driving all of the
necessary processes for rapid
development, rapid proliferation and for
um it's the constant disregulated
disregulated growth DNA, RNA, protein
synthesis. The glutamine has the
nitrogen and carbons to make new DNA and
RNA. The glucose has the carbons for
fatty acids and proteins. And these two
fuels are driving the beast. And once
you understand and then the other thing
you need to know is that they can only
use fermentable fuels. Fatty acids and
ketone bodies are non fermentable fuels.
They're not they cannot be used by tumor
cells, but they are they can be used by
normal cells that have normal
mitochondria. So the solution to the
cancer problem is simultaneously
targeting the ferment fermentation
metabolism of the cells which is the
glucose and glutamine but by
transitioning the body over over to
ketone bodies which allows the normal
cells in the brain and all the other
organs to to function and fatty acids
for the liver. Tumor cells can't use
fatty acids and ketone bodies. So the
solution to the cancer problem is very
simple. You have to simultaneously
target the fermentation while
transitioning the body over to fuels
that cannot be fermented. And this now
puts massive pressure and kills the
tumor cells without toxicity.
>> Wow. I mean, it's so clear when you when
you say it like that because look, if
you were not medical, right?
If you knew nothing about cancer and the
pathophysiology, but you knew that, hey,
listen, a cancer cell cannot use oxygen.
Even if oxygen is around, it doesn't use
oxygen to generate energy. It can only
use glucose
and glutamine. Right? If that's all you
knew, you told a child that, I reckon a
child would say, "Okay, well, let's not
give the body any more glucose or
glutamine. If that's what a cancer cell
feeds on, let's stop it." Right? Now,
that may be overly simplistic,
but it kind of sounds like that's the
conclusion from what you're saying.
>> Yeah. Well, I think the you can't stop
the glutamine because uh it's a
non-essential amino acid
and it's the most abundant amino acid in
our body. It plays an a massively
important role in our gut, our immune
system, the ura cycle. So, glutamine is
is they call it a non-essential amino
acid, but for cancer, it's an absolutely
essential amino acid. You can use diet
and lifestyle to lower blood sugar for
sure, but you need drugs uh that will
interrupt the glutamine pathway, the
glutaminolysis pathway essentially. So
we use a comb a combination of of diet
and uh repurposed drugs in the what we
developed called the press pulse
therapeutic strategy for managing cancer
where we can we bring the body into a
state of very low glucose high ketones
and then we hit the surviving tumor
cells with uh drugs that target that can
target and disrupt the the glutamine
pathway but we do it over very po we
pulse it we don't do it too aggressively
knowing knowing the value of glutamine
for the normal physiological function of
our body, you can't go after glutamine
uh aggressively because you're going to
harm the body. So, you have to know the
biology. You have to really understand
biology, evolutionary biology to manage
cancer. And uh once you understand that,
like you said, it's quite it's not that
complicated uh once you break down uh
the issues. So uh um once you understand
the issues and dissect them it I mean
yeah there's you have to know about
energy metabolism and you have to know
about a variety of these things for sure
but once you know that then the the path
to resolution the path to long-term
management without toxicity becomes
obvious.
You mentioned oxygen making energy in
the presence of oxygen or making energy
well in the presence of oxygen but
without utilizing oxygen. And I think a
lot of the public have heard about
aerobic exercise and anorobic exercise.
So they understand I think a lot of
people that will remember from biology
class at school that when your body's
utilizing oxygen you can do certain
forms of exercise but if you push up the
intensity and let's say you're playing
football or doing lots of highintensity
sprints that at some point you go to
anorobic where actually you're
generating energy no longer using oxygen
or not exclusively using oxygen.
for people who are thinking about that,
can you help us understand like is is
there a similarity there between what
you're saying about cancer and the
difference between aerobic and anorobic
exercise?
>> Yeah. Well, I think that's a that's
really an important point. With the
sprinting, you build up lactic acid
because the uh the muscles are working
at such an incredible speed uh that the
amount of oxygen delivered to the tissue
in the blood is not is not uh uh enough
to keep the muscles uh working through
an aerobic mechanism. But the muscle can
generate tremendous energy using
anorobic uh short periods of time. for
short periods of time your muscles can
burn energy uh through anorobic
mechanisms which is which is taking in a
massive amounts of glucose and getting
energy. Now, as soon as the muscle stops
contracting, you're breathing oxygen so
that the the muscle can recover uh ATP
synthesis through oxidative uh
phosphorilation. But when they were in
that sprinting condition, uh they were
dumping out lactic acid which and this
was the how they found the Corey cycle.
Uh Saul and Gertie Corey that received
the Nobel Prize when the muscles were
dumping out massive lactic acid into the
bloodstream uh from this uh very active
uh activity. The lactic acid would go to
the liver and the liver would conjugate
the lactic acid back into a glucose. two
lactic acids were reconfigured into
glucose molecule to replenish the the
blood sugars. Now muscle is very
interesting because it's it muscle
conserves. Muscle does not share glucose
with other organs. This is a very
interesting thing. Information is not
enough to make change in your life. You
have to take action. So to help you take
action after watching this video, I've
created a free nutrition guide for you.
This contains the five most important
practices I've seen in over two decades
of seeing patients. They work for you no
matter what your dietary preference.
There's a step-by-step action plan to
help you implement those changes in your
life. If you want to receive that free
guide right now, just click on the link
in the description box below. And it's
an evolutionarily conserved adaptation.
So muscle stores energy in the form of
glycogen. you have glycogen in your
muscles and that energy that can be
broken down very quickly for rapid for
rapid uh rapid energy. But muscle does
not share glucose with any other organ
for for mostly. And that's because when
a lion would chase us, we better damn
well have enough energy in our muscles
to run away because if you're sharing if
you're sharing your energy with some
other organ, you're not going to be able
to run as fast when the lion chases you.
So um uh so clearly the con conservation
of energy within muscles is an
evolutionary adaptation for survival. Uh
liver on the other hand will store
glycogen and that glycogen in the liver
can be shared. In fact it's shared
majority mostly with the brain and uh as
we stop eating blood sugar goes down
glycogen is mobilized largely from from
liver uh which can then subserve the
function of the brain. Brain burns a lot
of a lot of glucose. On the other hand,
if the glycogen stores, that's why it
takes about 36 hours after you stop
eating for the glycogen stores in the
liver to be depleted and then all of a
sudden we then mobilize energy out of
the atyposytes in our body and the
ataposytes release the fatty acids back
into the bloodstream. Those fatty acids
go to the liver and the liver makes
ketone bodies, water soluble breakdown
products of the fat which can then
provide the brain the energy for the
brain. So we are an unbelievably uh
sophisticated machine that we have these
different organs and different
populations of cells that can be
flexible in how they generate and use
energy. The cancer cell on the other
hand is trapped. It's linked only into a
fermentation energy. So knowing that
this cell is massively limited in its
capability of survival, we now have
strategies. we can take advantage of
knowing how the body works to eliminate
and kill cancer cells uh without
toxicity. Once you understand
evolutionary biology and systems
physiology, you now know the strategies
for managing cancer
through the lens of evolution.
You mentioned before oxygen came into
the atmosphere and before we evolved
into being multisellular
those single cells would
generate energy through the process of
fermentation which is what cancer cells
do.
>> Yeah.
>> So
is the cancer cell then moving towards
a more primitive form of energy
production?
>> Yeah, you're actually right. I mean we
can't we can't say the cells before
oxygen came into the atmosphere as
cancer cells because cancer cells
developed from cells that were
differentiated they were they were part
of the society of cells however they
share a common uh energy mechanism they
ferment um and fermentation before uh
oxygen came into the atmosphere was the
way the way all cells uh uh got energy
was a fermentation mechanism and they
ferment um whatever carbohydrate or
whatever amino acid would be in the
environment. And interestingly enough,
it was called the alpha period of of
life on earth as St. Geri called it. Uh
all of the cells at that time had
disregulated cell growth. They were
unbridled proliferation and they would
proliferate like crazy until the
fermentation fuels in the environment
dissipated and then they would die. Uh
cancer cells are the same. they they
they will survive as long as there are
fermentable fuels in their micro
environment. And when you remove the
environment, they die very quickly, just
like cells did in the old days, the the
old days, let's put it this way, in in
in in the time before oxygen. So, but
their behavior is very very similar and
and when you say cancer cells look very
primitive like when you when you look at
cancer under a microscope I mean it's
just a massive pile of cells in all
different dysmorphic stages um they look
very primitive they look they look uh
very uh undifferentiated compared to the
normal cells of the organ from which
they arose but the commonality is that
the cancer cell is surviving on ferment
fermentation
um because its oxidative phosphorilation
is defective. The cells before oxygen
came into the atmosphere had no
mitochond mitochondria were a fusion
between two different organels two
different organisms uh an organism that
could capture the oxygen and use it for
energy. So we had this symbiotic and
that led to the formation of metazoans
which are are multisellular organisms of
which we are all metazzoans
multisellular couldn't have
multisellularity until you were able to
capture the energy from oxygen in the in
the fusion hybridization between these
organ between these different organisms.
Yeah. So the cancer cell is simply using
the heirlooms of energy metabolism from
the past to grow in a disregulated way
and that and that disregulated growth
will continue as long as the cancer cell
has access to fermentable fuels in the
micro environment. So our way of
managing cancer is simply to restrict
the availability of the fermentable
fuels in the micro environment using
both diet and specific drugs uh and then
using the normal cells of our body to
out compete and digest and destroy the
cancer cells. It's unbelievable when you
really understand the mechanisms and the
strategies involved. You can get very
excited about this.
>> Well, it's absolutely fascinating to
hear it. how we've evolved, how we get
energy, and then what happens to that
cancer cell and how it reverts back to
actually maybe the oldest form, the
oldest way that we have of generating
energy, the cancer cell is utilizing
that. So that's that's really really
interesting. I want to talk a little bit
about genes and genetics because we hear
a lot of things like in the media let's
say over the last 10 years there's been
a growing awareness of bracken one and
bracka 2 and how that potentially can
increase the risk of things like breast
cancer or ovarian cancer by 50 to 80%
depending on which study you read. Now,
I'd love to know your thoughts on that,
but I'd also love to know just more
broadly about
this relationship between genes and
cancer. I have heard prominent
oncologists in the UK, professor, say
things like, "We are born
with the genetic codes for cancer within
ourselves, but they're kept locked in
place by suppressor genes." And then
something happens whether it be from,
you know, carcinogens in the diet or the
environment or whatever we're exposed
to. And then what happens is that
genetic material becomes rearranged. And
once it becomes rearranged, those cells
no longer stop growing and they become
cancerous and they spread. So that's a
viewpoint I've heard. What is your view
on that? And I guess more broadly, where
did genes fit into this whole
conversation around cancer?
Yeah. Uh well, of course that's the
basis for the sematic mutation theory
here in the United States. National
Cancer Institute on their website they
say cancer is a genetic disease caused
by mutations in specific genes uh tumor
suppressor genes and protoco genes and
these kinds of things and this leads to
a disregulated uh cell growth. And this
is the dominant consistent view we have
right now. the somatic mutation theory
uh where uh the uh mutations arise
randomly in a population of cells which
then leads to uh disorder of the cell
cycle and and the proliferation. But you
have two different kinds of genes. You
have those inherited in the germ line
and you have those that are acquired
through um various insults in in the
environment. when you mention about
Bracka one the high the that's a
inherited mutation uh that contributes
to uh a greater risk for breast cancer
and when you look at what does the BA1
mutation do it disrupts oxidative
phosphorilation in the mitochondria the
most the most uh prominent inherited
mutation is the p-53 mutation in the
leaf ramen many uh disorder syndrome the
leaf many where about 80% % you have
about 80 to 85% penetrance of that gene
leading to ovarian cancer, breast
cancer, brain cancer. There's a v
variety of cancers that are linked to
the leaf rameni. The leaf rameni encodes
a protein in the electron transport
chain of the mitochondria cytochrome c
oxidase 2. So what you're do what these
inherited mutations are doing and we
went through all of the inherited
mutations and all of the inherited
mutations risk factors uh damage
mitochondria in a in a particular way u
putting them on the path to destabilized
energy metabolism and a consequent
fermentation metabolism. So, so the
inherited mutations are what we call
secondary risk factors, not primary risk
factors because in order for an
inherited mutation to be a primary cause
of a disease like like uh the precinylan
mutation in Alzheimer's disease that's
100% associated with the development of
Alzheimer's disease. There is no cancer
gene linked uh a germline linked
mutation that is in is 100% associated
with the onset of a particular cancer.
So we call those secondary risk factors
just like being exposed to a carcinogen.
If you inherit a mutation in BA 1 or one
of these your your risk for the
development of cancer is certainly
higher but it's not 100 100%. Now the in
somatic mutations this is where the
cancer this is where a cell in the body
will randomly accumulate mutations uh
some of which will then lead to
destabilized growth. Okay. So where do
the sematic mutations come from? And
they come from destabilized energy
metabolism in the mitochondria. How does
that happen? So ROS reactive oxygen
species are a byproduct of dysfunctional
uh oxidative phosphorilation. So the
oxygen that the tumor cell is taking in
is not being used efficiently for ATP
synthesis but rather is throwing out
these radicals these reactive oxygen
species. What do they do? They cause
mutations in the DNA. They lead to the
mutations in the DNA. So the mutations
that we see in cancer are largely
downstream epiphenomenon of the damage
to oxidative phosphorilation forcing the
cell into a fermentation metabolism
leading to acidification of the micro
environment which further damages the
nuclear genome. So that most of what we
see in cancer the genetic mutations are
largely downstream epipenomena of the
damage to oxidative phosphorilation. So
they're not effects, they're not causes,
they're effects of this whole process.
>> Okay? So let's just get this really
clear. So because a lot of people will
have absorb the idea
that cancer is genetic and of course you
know that there's been a there's been a
conversation online for I would say at
least 10 years about what a woman might
want to do if they have one of these
bracket mutations. And I think there's
some very prominent examples of women
having prophylactic operations, removing
both breasts to try and ensure that they
don't get breast cancer in the future.
And I definitely want to uh get your
perspective on that and your view on on
on these kind of procedures. But the big
picture I'm getting from what you're
saying is that look, these genes may
increase the likelihood
that you are going to develop cancer,
but they're not 100%. They're not
deterministic genes fully. So
>> yeah. Yeah, they're risk we call them
risk factor.
>> It's a risk factor, right? It's a risk
factor. But
>> if you make uh significant modifications
to your diet, your lifestyle, your
environment, the amount of stress you're
under, all all kinds of things that you
try your best to to significantly change
your environment,
you can then also significantly decrease
your risk of developing that cancer even
if you have the gene.
Yes, you are absolutely correct. So, you
have cho you have I guess at least two
choices. If you are detected to have uh
the BA one, let's just use that. But
there are there are several other genes
that this would also apply to. But the
brack one you rest you because you some
women uh have done prophylactic removal
of breasts and ovaries and things like
this to reduce their risk for getting
cancers in those organ systems or uh
recognizing that they would have this
ris risk factor. How would they reduce
the probability of that inherited
mutation causing cancer? And you're
absolutely right. that cancer cannot
occur if the mitochondria in the cell
remain healthy. And how do you keep
mitochondria in your cell healthy? By
exercise and enhancing ketogenesis. How
do you do that? Well, you can do water
only fasting. You can do a variety of of
of of diets uh that will reduce glucose
and elevate ketones. Ketones are a super
fuel for mitochondria. They reduce
reactive oxygen species, the damaging
the damaging byproducts of respiration.
So ketones can significantly reduce
damage to mitochondria, allowing that
organel to function in a highly precise
manner for long periods of time. So yes,
diet and exercise in the right foods in
the right context could take the risk of
a herited mutation that you' say 50%
chance of getting a a cancer with that
mutation. And you could reduce that down
massively. I don't know to what extent
because the studies haven't been done in
the correct population, but but we do
know that we can significantly just as
you said, you can significantly reduce
your risk knowing that you can't get
cancer without
you get cancer from damaged respiration.
Protect the mitochondria and the risk
will go down.
>> Look, I'm all for informed consent like
real informed consent. So you tell a
patient,
you know, what all the options are. And
of course, a patient is entitled
to do what they want, right? They're
entitled to do what they want with their
own body. But what I'm passionate about,
why I work so hard on this show each
week is to help give people information.
So actually, they're empowered to know,
oh, actually there are some options
here. There are some options. Now,
someone may say, I don't want to take
that option. Fine. Informed consent to
me means or one part of it is giving
people all the options. So if you have
been diagnosed with epilepsy
as well as the anti-epileptic drugs if
there's good evidence as there clearly
is that ketogenic diets can be of use
and in some people can be
transformative.
Surely you should also be told that at
the same time now you may go but I don't
want to do a ketogenic diet. It's too
difficult. It doesn't fit my life. fine,
you're entitled to make that decision,
but you kind of need to be given that
choice if we're going to be
evidence-based, if we're truly
practicing informed consent, right?
>> Yeah, absolutely. I was on on those um
decision committees when I was a member
of the Epilepsy Society of America. I
was the society's representative to the
corporations on this whole thing. And
you know um the ketogenic diet developed
from um Wilder in 1921 only when he
realized that many of these intractable
seizures could be modified significantly
with water only fasting but water only
fasting is only good for a certain
period of time and you have to eat
something. So uh what he found was that
when you water only fast blood sugar
goes down ketones go up. Is there a diet
that can do what water only fasting
could do? And that was the the ketogenic
diet. It was managing a lot of different
se in children. Uh it works in adults,
but it's the the children. The problem
is with kids is that when they have a a
blown seizure or they have absant
seizures or whatever, it disturbs the
parents tremendously. And the parents
have control over the child's diet, what
they're doing. So in order to avoid
seeing your child writhing on the floor
and foaming, they would say, "Okay,
you're going to stay strict on this diet
uh because I don't want to see you
seize." In the 1930s, certain drugs uh
became available that would also stop
seizures. And obviously, it was much
easier to take the drug than to adhere
to a kind of a rigid diet. The problem
with these drugs is long term, they have
very adverse consequences. And then in
the 1990s,
uh, mid 1990s, Jim Abrams, uh, of of a
movie producer from Hollywood, his son
Charlie, uh, had this terminal kind of
epilepsy where he was actually dying.
And then he contacted folks at the
John's Hopkins Medical School in
Baltimore, the late John Freeman, uh,
who is one of the few guys left that
that like to study, uh, ketogenic diets,
and they rescued Charlie, uh, from his
condition. They made a movie out of it.
First Do No Harm was the movie by Mel
with Meil Stre uh a friend of Jim Abrams
uh made this movie which then brought
tremendous attention back to this
ketogenic diet uh uh because uh it had
been it had fallen by the wayside when I
was at Yale University in in New Haven,
Connecticut. I wanted to do a project on
ketogenic diet internal support and the
people in the neurology department in
the medical school in general said ah
ketogenic diets nobody's interested in
that stuff anymore. So my grant was just
like oh no no more. So when one of my
students came to me in the late 90s when
I was here at Boston College and said,
"Hey, there's a there's a meeting in
Seattle, Washington on ketogenic diet u
spearheaded by Jim Abrams because his
son Charlie uh did so well in this
ketogenic diet. He wanted to bring the
concept to the world that this ketogenic
diet should be resurrected as a
non-toxic management for epilepsy
seizures." So I told my seizure, "Ah,
nobody's interested in ketogenic diets."
She said, "Oh, please send me anyway."
So I I sent her out the other meeting.
She came back. Oh my god, you can't
believe how powerful the diet is.
Everybody's so excited about this diet
for epilepsy. So we started working on
ketogenic diets because we had the best
animal models of epilepsy just like
humans with epsson seizures and all this
kind of stuff and we started to see wow
this this diet does work on the animal
models as well and I said we published
all these papers and everything and um I
said wow what's the mechanism of action
I don't know you got to lower glucose
and elevate ketones. when we were doing
research on cancer at the same time
looking at angiogenesis which is the the
vascularization of the tumor cells. So
we put the the when we put the epileptic
mice on on calorierestricted diets that
lowered blood sugar and elevated
ketones. We knew from from Warberg
yesterday I said what the Warberg he
said you lower blood you lower blood
sugar and you can manage cancer. So we
started to put uh move the the diets
that we were using to manage epilepsy in
the mice onto our cancer models which
were the best models that we spontaneous
models of cancer in the mice. And lo and
behold, we said, "Holy crap, this these
uh calorierestricted diets knock the
hell out of angioeno. Everybody's
getting excited about angioenesis. You
can you can completely manage
angioenesis with these diets." And you
know, holy Napoleon Ferrar and all these
other guys that were making all these
ant anti-angioenic imunotherapies and
and stuff and a lot of them don't work
and they cause the cancers to be worse.
But when you when you start using
metabolic therapy, so after we saw that
and not only that, we started killing
these cancer cells through a variety of
different mechanisms. Okay. Uh then we
said, "Oh, we should be shifting
shifting our power away from the we
actually had two uh parallel programs uh
metabolic management of epilepsy and
metabolic management of cancer." But of
course uh folks from England and the
United States got together and they
wrote up a clinical trial. They said,
"Well, we can't believe uh epilepsy uh
managing epileptic seizures with
ketogenic diets. There's no clinical
trials." Um uh well, Dr. across from
England and uh our group here at John's
Hopkins got together and they wrote up a
a really nice publication showing in a
clinical trial that ketogenic diet
absolutely can manage a variety of
epileptic seizures in children. So you'd
say to yourself, well like you said,
well then we should use this but no
they'll only measure well they'll only
do ketogenic diet for managing seizures
only after your expensive drugs don't
work. then you'll do that that but we've
all argued that you should be doing
metabolic therapy for epilepsy first if
that if that doesn't work maybe you can
consider lowd dose drugs but they still
they still have it reversed in the
cancer field the stuff right now what
I'm saying is predominantly unknown
people have no clue that you can manage
cancer in a very similar kind of way
obviously with certain certain uh
differences but now that's the the
situation so so the argument is well we
can't use metabolic therapy for cancer
because there's no clinical trials to
prove it despite the fact that the
science is rock solid to support why you
should do that. So that's the conundrum
that we have right now is that no one on
the planet has yet and and we can't do a
clinical trial yet because the people
needed to do that aren't trained and you
need to know what to do and how to do it
and we're working on that right now. So
as soon as we have the our treatment
protocol, we'll be able to move into the
cancer field with the same with the with
the same uh uh uh uh uh intensity as we
did in the epilepsy field to manage to
manage the epileptic seizure. So it's a
it's an evolving situation with parallel
studies uh knowing how the brain works
under different the ketosis issue and
all of these different kinds of things
coming together to know how to enhance
the health and vitality of your normal
cells without harming the body. I know I
said an awful lot in a very short period
of time.
>> No, it's I I mean you're clearly very
passionate about this and and with good
reason. How long have you been studying
cancer for now?
>> Oh, I well I studied cancer for probably
40 years, but it was not not in the way
to manage the disease. Uh I studied
cancer like 90% of the people studying
cancer. We do research on some aspect of
cancer like I was doing glyolippids. We
were looking at you know all the
different abnormalities in glyolippids
in cancer cells. So it had nothing to do
uh with actual uh design to manage the
disease. Of course everybody in their
papers everybody many many people put it
oh this information could potentially be
important at some future point or
whatever. Um but it wasn't a direct it
wasn't a direct assault uh on the
management of the disease uh where you
could actually cons where where you can
actually see an observable outcome in
someone that would be riddled with a
stage four cancer. Uh h okay how would
understanding the glyolippid dis d dis d
dis d dis d dis d dis d dis d dis d dis
d dis d disregulation in that in that
person with a stage four cancer in a
very short period of time lead to a
management strategy and the answer was
none. So, and that's the majority people
signaling cascades and looking at this
and looking at that. I mean, you can do
that for the next 150 200 years and
you're not going to have any impact in
the clinic. So, the idea is how you
going to imp how you going to make your
research impactful to the person dealing
with a stage 4 cancer today. We've used
the word cancer a lot during this
conversation so far and of course there
are lots of different types of cancer.
You know, you can differentiate them
depending on location in the body.
brain, pancreas, prostate, uh of course
the different pathological types of
cancers as well. So when we say cancer,
do we need to be a bit more specific
about what we're talking about or would
you state based upon your research that
actually all of them are fundamentally
the same? There is a problem with
respiration. There's a problem with
generating energy in the mitochondria.
Like just help us understand that if if
you will.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Well, that's really so
important because we were all led to
believe and we still are pounded by
information saying you're we have a
therapy for your specific kind of
cancer. You hear this all the time like
breast cancer is different from colon
cancer, different from brain cancer,
different from bladder cancer, different
from the leukemas. You hear you hear
this all the time and and that's based
again on the sematic mutation theory of
cancer. When you start to look at the
mutations in all these different
cancers, they're all quite different
from each other. they're even different
from each other within the same within
the same type of cancer within the same
tumor you'll find all kinds of different
mutations but all of the cells now what
I what I did I I went back and I said
well if um if all all the cancers that
we know are fermenting
uh to get energy that says there's some
commonality between them so in order to
in order to justify that I had to go
back and go through historical records
on ultra um um uh hisystologology m the
the the um you know uh the way electron
microscopy ultra structure of the cells
in a cancer. So I would look at lung
cancer, breast cancer, colon cancer,
pancreatic cancer, bladder cancer, blood
cancers and I was looking for a
commonality and that commonality
uh was abnormalities in the number
structure and function of mitochondria
in all of the major cancers and and
that's what I found. And in the in the
concepts of evolutionary biology,
structure determines function. This is a
a a a wellestablished concept. Structure
determines function. If the structure of
the organel that generates energy
through oxygen is abnormal, the function
of that organel will be diminished in
some significant way leading to an
alternative energy which would be
fermentation. So when I went back and
looked at all of the major cancers, I
found abnormalities in all of these
different cancers. Uh and then that
would lead to the explanation that they
would all need to have fermentation in
one way or another. uh and that leads to
the the concept that if they do ferment
there's only two fuels that they can
ferment which is glucose and glutamine
and we know every major cancer is
dependent on glucose and glutamine
fermentation. So it comes right back to
the yes they look different under the
microscope they look different in their
genomic profiles but metabolically
they're all very very similar and will
respond quite effectively to a singular
strategy of metabolic therapy.
the ketogenic diet or certainly the
presence of ketones in the body is now
you know the research is accelerating so
fast we're seeing
benefits potential benefits of ketones
in neurodeenerative disease in
Alzheimer's in mental illness in cancer
of course in weight loss and it's really
interesting isn't it that how can this
one fuel source or potentially this one
diet, ketosis.
And of course, there's many ways to get
into nutritional ketosis.
But it's it's it's very interesting to
me how this could potentially have a
wide variety of different benefits for a
wide variety of seemingly different
conditions. Now,
let's look at this methodically.
>> Yeah, you're right. You're absolutely
right. I mean, okay, let's go back to
our um Paleolithic ancestors. All right,
so uh our uh uh for uh thousands and
thousands of years, um uh we were in a
state of ketosis. Uh mainly because food
was not available, carbohydrates were
certainly very limited to seasonal
situations. So our ancestors, we were
always in a state of therapeutic
ketosis. We we know that in the
Aboriginal populations, not only was
cancer rare, diabetes was rare, uh
cardiovascular disease was rare, uh
Alzheimer's was never heard of or rarely
discussed or rarely identified um as
some all of these things uh that we see
that you've just uh mentioned are are
linked to mitochondrial uh function. So,
uh, ketones, as I said, as as my late
good friend, um, uh, Richard Vichch from
the National
NIH, ketones are a super fuel. Uh, they
allow the health and vitality of our
mitochondria, they they allow our
mitochondria to remain very very
healthy. So, when you when you talk
about um, you know, all of these
different linkages for all these
different diseases, they all comes back
to energy metabolism. And we didn't have
uh uh all of these chronic diseases when
we were existing in the paleolithic
period. We had other things that would
kill us like uh infections, bacterial
infe. We didn't have antibiotics, uh
falls, uh arthritis, you would have a
variety of things that would limit your
capability of of longer term survival.
But cancer, dementia, cardiovascular
disease, all of these kinds of things uh
were not there.
>> Yeah. So or very very rare. So you're
when you say ketogenic diet, it's
actually you got to be very careful
because it's not necessarily a ketogenic
diet. It's the state of being in
therapeutic ketosis is is and a
ketogenic diet can put you in
therapeutic ketosis. But many of these
so-called ketogenic diets uh are not
done correctly. People go out eat too
much of it. They don't do it the right
way. It's nutritionally imbalanced.
Yeah, I mean, but uh but the bottom
line, the the underlying theme here is
nutritional ketosis prevents chronic
diseases.
>> That's a really interesting point there.
Right. So, if we're going to talk about,
as I hope we get to during this
conversation, nutrition and cancer and
the link between it, and you've covered
bits of it throughout this conversation
so far, a lot of people will talk about
and there's there's there's lots of N
equals one studies, there's lots of
anecdotes of people
uh saying that I got a cancer diagnosis
and it caused me to stop and look at
everything in my life and I changed
dramatically my lifestyle. I started to
meditate. I lowered stress. I stopped
traveling all the time for work. I went
on a keto diet, for example, and you
know, my cancer never came back, right?
Or whatever it might be. You you hear
that a lot with uh a ketogenic diet. And
of course, that can be practiced in many
different ways. But you also hear people
saying that if they radically change
their diet to plant-based diets, right?
There's many case studies out there that
I've heard or certainly people
reporting. Now, it's really interesting
to me. So, I'm trying to put it all
together and go, "Well, okay,
what Thomas just said was that it's not
necessarily a ketogenic diet. It's the
state of ketosis." So, I guess what I'm
trying to get to, a plantrich diet
uh will have lots of polyphenols,
right, within it. And I know there's
been quite a few studies showing the
benefits of polyphenols in terms of
their role as signaling molecules and
what they can do for cancer risk.
Given what you know about cancer, how do
you put these two things together where
some people say they revolutionize their
health with a keto diet, other people
will say that they've done it with a
plant-based diet. How does that sit with
you when you think about cancer? Just
taking a quick break to give a shout out
to Vivo Barefoot Shoes. Now, I've been a
huge fan of Vivo Barefoots for over 10
years now, well before they started
supporting my podcast. They are the only
shoes that I wear and they really have
had a huge impact on my own life and the
lives of many of my patients. You see,
when people start wearing minimalist
shoes like Vivos, you can see
improvements in things like back pain,
hip pain, knee pain, foot pain, even
things like plantto fasciitis can often
get better. And scientific research
shows us that just wearing Vivos for
about 4 months or so improves the
strength in your feet by over 60%, which
is absolutely incredible. One thing
people don't realize about these shoes
is just how flexible they are, which
allows your feet to do what your feet
naturally want to do rather than the
shoe dictating your foot's movement.
Vivo Barefoot are giving my audience a
15% off one-time code when you make your
first order, and they make it really
easy for you to give them a try. They
give a 100day trial for new customers.
So, if you don't like them, you just
send them back for a full refund. I'm a
huge fan. I really hope you take
advantage of this offer. To get your 15%
off codes, all you need to do is go to
vivobarefoot.com/live
more or click on the link in the
description box below.
>> Yeah. Well, I think those are important
points and you know, we don't have
answers uh to all of that yet. I I I
know Kelly Turner wrote a book on called
rad radical remission and um in her book
on these cancers that you've just
mentioned like some people just do
something different and cancer goes
away. She she kind of cataloged all of
the different kinds of things that were
linked to rad so-called radical
remissions and and a large amount of it
had to do with a dramatic change in diet
and lifestyle. uh whether whether you
were a carnivore going through a vegan
or a vegan going through a carnivore, it
it seemed it seemed as though there were
radical changes in diet and lifestyle
that were um uh linked to these uh these
remissions. Uh you have to you have to
realize
um the cancer the cancer cell is a cell
uh hovering near death all the time
because it can't get energy efficiently.
So it has to depend upon the
fermentation fuels in the micro
environment and ever whenever you change
the whole physiology of your body you
are creating all the we evolved as a
species to survive under incredible uh
stresses in our environment whether it's
cold hot food absence food abundance or
whatever it was uh Rick Pototts of the
Smithsonian Institution described it uh
as our flexibility in uh survival al
cancer cells can't do that. They they're
very limited. So when you have these
radical changes in your body going from
one state to another, sometimes this
just the tumor cells just simply cannot
handle the change in some people making
these radical changes. So you don't have
a a very uh a good clinical trial or a
sophisticated approach to say you know
what is responsible for the elimination
of your cancer by by this radical
change. All we know is the tumor cells
up and died and they disappeared and
you're now healthy. Um, in the movie
that's coming out, the documentary film
called um, Cancer Revolution
um, by Brad and Maggie Jones. Brad is a
professional documentary filmmaker and
his wife Maggie who contacted me. She
had u stage 4 breast cancer that
metastasized to her brain. uh she went
on one of these radical keto uh changes
and she her cancer disappeared and she's
still doing very very well. But they've
collected a lot of these end of ones uh
a lot of these people that you just
mentioned and put them in the movie um
and they're all the faces are there and
I'm a survivor. I'm a survivor. One
after another after another and she's
collecting more and more of these
individuals that had stage four cancers
of a broad range. Lung cancer, brain
cancer, colon cancer, breast cancer and
they're all alive. Yeah.
>> And what is it? What is it about this?
And there's no there's no comprehensive
clinical trials on this because how
would you design such a clinical trial
to look at some sort of a radical change
in your diet and lifestyle? Um there's a
lot of variables that have not yet been
pinned down that we should need to focus
on. And this is the whole thing with
using ketogenic diets for ma managing
cancer. Uh what kind of ketogenic diet?
That's why we developed the glucose
ketone index calculator. We published
this and what it does is it allows the
any patient healthy or sick uh to know
whether they're going to be in a state
of maximal metabolic homeostasis. And uh
it's a meter. You can buy it on Amazon,
the the Keto Mojo meter. And it's a you
take a a blood a drop of blood and you
can measure with one stick your blood
sugar and with another stick your blood
ketones. And if you can get the ratio
down to 2.0 zero or below, you are going
to be in a state of metabolic
homeostasis. And that that really puts
tremendous pressure on cancer cells, uh,
diabetes, uh, all of these variety. In
other words, you're bringing yourself
back to a state of metabolic home with a
quantitative measure to let you know
when you're there.
>> Okay, I I want to talk about that. I
just want to finish off um, from the
previous question about keto diets,
plant-based diets. Another way I was
thinking about it as you were talking is
that if we
if we develop cancer
based upon everything we've said so far
I think it's fair to say that there's
something going on. You have been
receiving
a variety of inputs
whether out of choice or not out of
choice whether you're aware of or
whether you're not aware of but
whatever's happened your current
environment has resulted
in you developing cancer right we don't
know maybe what exactly it was but it
was multiple signals from your
environment and lifestyle. So if you
then undergo radical environmental and
lifestyle change,
I'm not saying no matter what, but you
know, if you're significantly making
changes, so the environment in which the
human body is now existing is
fundamentally different. Well, it kind
of stands to reason that in some cases
depending on how advanced that cancer
is, depending on the type. It stands to
reason that yeah, in some people the
environment has shifted and you're no
longer getting the inputs, so cancer
cells are no longer sort of growing and
proliferating, right? Does does that
sound like a reason?
>> That's absolutely correct. You're
absolutely correct.
>> Yeah. Especially if you catch it like
early.
>> Yeah. Well, when you're many people, not
all people, many people are first
diagnosed with cancer, they never knew,
oh gee, I just diagnosed with cancer.
How do you feel? I feel great. Uh it's
at that stage uh where the body is
pretty healthy other than you have a
growing tumor somewhere where you can do
this radical change and blast out these
uh marginalize and blast out these
cancer cells. The problem the problem is
many cancer many folks develop uh who
are diagnosed with cancer immediately
without any alternative thinking or
recognized they go in for toxic poisons
and radiation and and and what happens
is that undermines the health vitality
of the rest of the cells in the body
making them less capable of challenging
the vitality of these the existence of
these tumor cells. So then all I get so
many people contacting me who have
failed every kind of a cancer treatment
and the cancer is still growing and now
they want to do one of these metabolic
therapies and their bodies are rad uh
you know they're they're emaciated. They
they they have all kinds of adverse
effects and all kinds of stuff and now
you're going to ask your body to go
through this uh tough radical change uh
to try to eliminate. They should have
been doing that at the very beginning.
Not to say it can't happen. Uh because
when you have sometimes you get a stage
four diagnosis, you're still in pretty
good health. Oh, I got stage four
diagnosis. Okay. Well, great. Now you do
metabolic therapy to pound out those
cancer cells. Not to say that we can't
use radiation and chemo. Uh but they
would be used in a very strategic way in
very low doses at the right time at the
at the right setting, but not uh massive
poisoning at the beginning of this
disease. Yeah, that that is such a key
point because I really think that that
that message has to come through land
and clear which you're not necessarily
saying that we shouldn't be using some
of these modern advances like
chemotherapy or radiotherapy. What I
think you're saying, as you've just
pointed out there, is essentially that
look, let's get involved with the
metabolic side of things right at the
start, you know, and I'm guessing you're
going to say that in some people that
may be sufficient. In others, it's going
to reduce the size. It's going to allow
some cancer cells to die off so you can
be a bit more targeted and use lower
doses of chemotherapy or radiotherapy.
Right.
>> Absolutely. Absolutely. We have seen
that ourselves you know uh you shrink
the tumor down and make it extremely
vulnerable. Now you can come in with say
uh one of these uh therapies um modern
more modern therapies at a lower dose in
a more strategic way to finish off the
cancer survivors that the metabolic
therapy wasn't able to kill. Because one
thing is going to be in common when you
pair down the cancer cells are all kinds
of as you said they're all genetically
different from each other. They're all
fermenting uh but they're all
genetically different from each other.
But when you pair them down, the
survivors of metabolic therapy will have
something in common. And that that
commonality
uh makes them extremely vulnerable now
to some sort of targeted therapy because
all your all the cells are going to have
the same target on them. Uh so that's
the STR. So in other words, we need we
have a lot of tools for managing cancer.
It's just that we haven't been using
them in the correct way or understanding
the concepts of evolutionary biology to
enhance the success of the of the
treatments that we already have.
>> Yeah. We kind of need to embrace this
approach more. Not going either or. It's
like, well, why can't you do both? Why
can't why can't we do both? But but
we're not but going back to what I said
at the start that I was in I started
medical school in 1995,
right? We were taught how to diagnose
and we were taught to treat with
pharmaceuticals.
>> Yeah.
>> End off. Right. That is literally what
we were taught. And again, that can be
very useful for certain conditions.
>> But there's a big piece missing there.
Right. So the training needs to evolve
and I I honestly don't feel it has
evolved even now, you know, almost 30
years on. Yeah.
>> Well, you're you're 100% correct and and
uh what we know, we base it on on the
science. I mean, I I do the experiments
here in the lab. I I I I have the best
animal models for cancer. So, we know
what it's dosage, timing, and
scheduling. This is not what we call
sexy science. This is just knowing how
to how to manipulate the tools that you
have to the maximum efficiency. And then
we can translate that directly to
patients in the clinic. when I have all
these my physician colleagues say
they're coming to me and they're saying
wow you can't believe how powerful this
stuff is uh when you do it the right way
our group in Istanbul Turkey are using
uh metabolic therapy with conventional
uh uh treatments and they're using far
lower doses and and the outcomes are are
so much better so this is an evolving uh
process right now but I agree 100% we
have to do we have to know the tools
that we have what will work the best and
how to how to blend the system. Um, but
that we're not doing that. Yeah.
>> Uh, we're not doing that at all. I have
all this information. I publish all
these papers. We do all this kind of
stuff and then when the cancer patient
goes to their oncologist, no, there's no
evidence to support that. If it were
really true, I would have learned it in
medical school.
>> Well, we'll get into that because I've
got a few things to share about that.
Let's go to that glucose ketone meter
that you mentioned. That sounded really
interesting. Right. So,
you're measuring the ratio between
glucose in your blood and ketones. Is
that right?
>> Yes.
>> Now, if you were to take, you live in I
think Boston. If you were to go out into
the center of Boston and pick the first
10 people who passed you on an average
street downtown on a Saturday afternoon,
>> right? What do you think the glucose uh
ketone ratios would be in that
population typically?
>> I know exactly what they would be
because we we've done these kind of
>> Okay.
>> Not to guys walking through the streets
but to the students in my that at the
university here. So we can all of us we
test uh it's about 50 to 60 sometimes
70.
>> Oh, hold on. So 50 is that to one? So
it's basically
>> Yeah. So, so it's um you would have
glucose levels um well you can do
normally
uh your glucose levels would be uh let's
say 100 milligrams per decaliter
what does that come out to be you have
to divide that by 18 and that gives you
the millimmer uh ratio is that 4.5 or
something like this um you know 4 point
and the ketone value in millolar would
be 0.1
so you divide
the uh 4.5 by 0.1 or one of these kinds
of things. Okay. Uh you you you come up
with a value about 50 I I I have all the
the numbers
>> about 40 to 50 times higher based upon
that.
>> Yes. Yeah. Okay. So then you stop eating
like for how like when we did the water
only fasting here with the students um
it takes about four days and then you
start to see the ketones rise and the
glucose drops. So uh um because you stop
eating once you stop eating you're not
bringing glucose back into your system.
Um the only way you're going to get
glucose now is through the process of
gluconneogenesis where your body will
make glucose from breaking down uh
proteins and also you mobilize the fats
and most of these are called
triglycerides. So the two glycerol
backbones could be conjugated to make
one glucose molecule but the majority of
the fats are going to be used to make
ketone body. So the ketones are going to
gradually increase in your bloodstream
and their glucose gradually goes down
and you come to a a ratio where the
ketones and the glucose are about the
same similar miller or in your blood or
the ketones are higher in millolar than
the glucose. Therefore you get numbers
below one and that becomes super
healthy.
>> So you did you say before you want to
get to two or below ideally
>> well for killing c for killing cancer
cells for sure. Um, but for just general
health, yeah, you can get down to five
or even um like my my good friend Dom
Dagustinino from University of South
Florida. He's always in ketosis, right?
He's always in this kind of estate. Uh
he's like one of these Paleolithic guys,
you know, he likes to eat alligators and
squirrels. I mean, it was one of these
kinds of guys. He's always He's like
living he's like living the Paleolithic.
>> I really like Dom's work and I I'm
hopefully going to try and get him on
the show later in the year. and and he
shared we'll get to this maybe later but
he did share one of his colleagues I
think in a was it a mouse model where
they had GBM glyobblasto
>> yeah it was our model
>> was your model yeah and actually um by
using ketosis
>> and radiotherapy there was like full
remission I think from recollection
>> it was it was hyperbaric oxygen
hyperbaric oxygen we use hyperbaric
oxygen as an alternative to radiation
because Both radiation and hyperbaric
oxygen kill cancer cells by increasing
reactive oxygen species. So RO so if I
can kill but the hyperbaric oxygen
doesn't work until it doesn't work well
until you bring your blood sugar down
and your ketones up.
>> Are you passionate about the
groundbreaking and heroic research of
Dr. Thomas Ciphford on metabolic therapy
and cancer? So are we. That's why we've
created something special for you in
collaboration with Johnny Rocker Meyer,
a German book publisher and translator.
Introducing our collection of
meticulously crafted books that distill
the essence of Dr. Safe Reed's work.
Dive into the science and discoveries.
These summary books are your gateway to
understanding the intricate world of
metabolic ketogenic therapy in a clear,
concise, and engaging way. Whether
you're new to the subject or a seasoned
enthusiast, our books offer insights
that can change your life. Ready to
explore this transformative knowledge?
Visit our website at www.cancer as a
metabolic disease.com to get your copy.
You can buy the ebook there directly and
the paperbook via the provided links.
Here's the best part. A portion of every
purchase goes directly to support Dr.
Thomas Safereaded's groundbreaking
research. That's why the direct ebook
purchase is the best option to donate as
much as possible. You can see all of the
donations Mr. Rocker has already made at
www. ketoforcancer.net.
That's right. When you buy our books,
you're not just investing in your own
knowledge, you're also contributing to
the future of cancer research. Help us
make a difference. Together, we can
drive change and save lives.
So once you put the pressure on the
cancer cells, then you put patients in
hyperbaric chambers once they're in a
state of ketosis and then you start
killing cancer cells by the same
mechanism that radiation does, but
without harming the rest of the body.
That's why it's beautiful.
>> Yeah. So, so back to the glucose ketone
meter for a second, right? So the
average person on the street who's maybe
not paying attention to their diet may
have a 50 to1 ratio,
>> right? Yeah. You're saying that if you
have cancer and you want to kill cancer
cells, you want to get down to at least
two to one, ideally lower, right?
>> Yeah. 2.0 or below.
>> 2.0 below. So, that's a huge change.
Now,
>> I don't know if you know this or not,
but someone let's say like many people
these days to try and put their type 2
diabetes into remission of following low
carb diets
>> um on a and I guess you know low carb
can mean so many different things, but
to many people it's when they keep their
carbohydrate intake under 50 grams of
carbs per day. Some people would use
that as their definition, but of course
I'm aware there's a huge variety there.
If someone was having around 50 grams of
carbs a day and on a low carb diet, what
might you imagine their glucose to
ketone ratio to be?
>> Well, it's certainly going to be lower
than what than it was before. You could
use this meter, this uh we published the
calculation and the the company that
makes Keto Mojo um put a chip in the
meter. So, you just push the button, it
gives you the ratio right off the bat.
So PA patients can can always monitor
uh their GKI. We call it glucose ketone
index. Their GKI.
>> Do you do it yourself?
>> Yeah, I do it occasionally. I I'll I'll
uh some guy will tell me, "Oh, I got
this keto drink, so I'll I'll I'll not
eat for about 18 to 20 hours. I I'll
take my my GKI, find out what it is,
stop eating for it, and then chug his
little little drink, do some exercise,
come back and measure it again, and
determine whether or not I'm in going in
the right direction." And sometimes it
does it does work.
>> Do and do you have a feeling because I
guess we can talk about treatment and we
could talk about prevention. Right. So
if you have cancer already, we know that
there's been a variety of signals to
your body and for whatever reason now
cancer cells are starting to
proliferate. So at that point you're
saying no matter I think you're saying
no matter what the cancer is or the
sight of it one of the things you want
to be thinking about is trying to reduce
these fermentable fuel sources to the
cancer which are glucose and glutamine
and it's easier with diet at least to
try and remove that glucose by going
into ketosis.
So far so good.
>> Yeah, you're absolutely right. and and
what what uh George Cahill who was the
head of the Joslyn Diabetes Center
passed away a few years ago. He found
that the patients who did water only
fasting to 14 to 20 days, the blood
glutamine would go down as well.
>> So, so if you want to push it that way
and I have I know personally several
people who have completely eliminated
their cancer by just doing water only
fasting.
>> Yeah.
>> Uh now people when you tell cancer
patients, oh, you got to do you don't
don't eat any food for 21 days or so,
they'll think you're nuts. So that's why
the the the keto uh like carnivore only
diets uh are very low in carbohydrates.
The vegan diets are a little bit harder
because the plants we h but we have to
use a lot of energy to to to burn the
plants up. We didn't evolve to we were
not born we did not evolve to eat only
plants. We evol we're omnivores. We can
eat everything. But you're right. So the
GKI values will tell whatever person,
whether you're a vegan, a carnivore, or
whatever. It it it cuts across all
diets. It cuts across everything because
it tells you right off the bat whether
I'm in a zone to kill cancer cells
regardless what they always ask me, can
I eat this? Can I eat that? I don't
know. I said, what does it do to your
GKI?
>> Yeah, this is interesting, right?
Because we've all got different
>> bodies. We've got different microbiomes,
right? We all we're seeing that with
personalized nutrition now that
>> someone can have a banana and uh their
blood sugar can go into their diabetic
range, someone else could have a banana
and have a pretty stable blood sugar,
right? So, right,
>> I love things that cut through the
nutrition wars because ultimately it's
like, well, what's going to work for
you? Do we know yet?
And I I think I'm going to buy one of
these glucose ketone meters straight
after this conversation. And I just want
I I'd love to know what I'm in.
>> Yeah. In fact, I I made the meter for
glyopblasto patients with brain cancer
because they they they need it more than
anyone. But now I get all these health
gurus out there, these guys that are
running health clinics and everything
and they're saying, "Oh, I got a GKI."
Like, you know, it's like, so uh
obviously it's cutting across the the
populations.
>> What do you want your GKI at?
>> You know, we're It's hard to say. All I
know is that uh when you don't feel well
and you feel kind of iffy, don't eat for
don't eat for a couple of bad. Whatever
was bothering you seems to go away when
your body when you're having you start
getting super healthy. Um but if I were
to have cancer, having written the
protocol to treat cancer prices with my
colleague Thomas Durier, we're working
on the treatment protocols right now.
You know, the the first thing you're
going to do is you're going to you're
going to you take stop taking Carbo, get
your GKI down. People say, "Oh, I don't
care how hard it is that you get it
closer to 2.0 or below below one, you're
going to start killing cancer cells."
So, what we do, because it's such a hard
thing, what we do is we we we we take
zero carb diets for about 10 days to see
where your GKI is, and you can start to
see it stairst step down in the right
direction. And then from there you can
step off into water only fasting because
the trauma of doing water only fasting
the difficulty of your physiology to do
that like as as opposed to going cold
turkey. Okay. You're going to eat a big
meal today and now for the next five
days you're not going to eat anything.
The body goes through it's almost like
trying to break alcohol nicotine
addiction. Yeah. The body the brain is
addicted to glucose. It's a it's like a
it's like a an addictive agent. So, you
have to lower that addiction slowly with
a zero carb diet. You're still eating,
but you're not getting carbs. And then
once you're down to a a GKI of about
five or seven, you jump now into water
only fasting. Once you're in that zone
of water only fasting now, and you can
keep a low GKI, that's when we come in
with the battery of drugs, these uh um
these repurposed drugs that hammer
hammer the glutamine and further lower
the glucose. These tumor cells are
toast. They can't handle this kind of a
a dramatic change in your body. They
often die. And not only that, the bo the
body cells compete directly with the
tumor cells, starving them even further.
And not only that is called autoolytic
cannibalism. Your body actually goes
after the tumor cells and uses them for
the fuel to for the rest of the cells
that are healthy. It's unbelievable. You
have to This is evolutionary biology in
action.
>> It is absolutely amazing to hear this.
>> It's even more amazing to see it in
action.
Some people uh Thomas are going to say
this is pretty controversial, right?
You're you're talking about
stuff that we've got no evidence for,
right? You're talking about water really
fast. No, no. I I I know you have. I'm
just trying to
>> I'm trying to think about what would
your critics say. Now, some people will
say you need um people are going to lose
weight, right? and you need proper
weight to fight off this cancer and to
deal with the toxic effects of the
chemo. Right? So for anyone who is
thinking that and I'm sure this has been
leveled at you before, what would you
say to them?
>> Well, this is again u an extremely uh
important important point. Um
uh you know when you say weight lo why
why there's two reasons why you would
lose weight with a cancer one is the
cexia which is the signaling from the
cancer cells to the muscles to dissolve
the muscle to get glutamine for the
cancer. So um and the other way reason
for weight because the treatment you're
going to be given this poor person is so
poisonous. They have a fatigue,
diarrhea, um nausea, vomiting, all this
kind of stuff. This is this is makes you
lose weight. you're not hungry anymore.
You're you're you're So, we want you to
take as much carbohydrate back into your
body to to keep the weight on. So, cexic
weight loss and poisonous weight loss
from poison. Um, this is called
pathological weight loss. You're you're
you're sick
>> as opposed to therapeutic weight loss.
When you stop eating, your body gets
super healthy. It doesn't you're not
poisoning the body. You're making it
stronger and healthier. So that's why
depending on the weight of the patient
at the time we start the or my
colleagues will start the treatment, we
have to design the kind of treatment
that would be appropriate for that
individual's body weight. If you have a
some guy walking into the into the the
clinic that weighs 300 lbs and you're
worried about him uh losing weight from
the treatment. I mean this is absurd.
This kind of this guy with that amount
of body weight can blast the hell out of
his cancer. So uh just because he has so
much energy stored in his body that that
tumor cells won't be able to use the
fats that he mobilizes. So you have to
use it you you have to understand the
difference between therapeutic weight
loss versus pathological weight loss.
And the medical establishment hasn't
come to recognize these differences yet.
So they don't they think weight loss is
bad. Uh yeah because you're poisoning
somebody you know um that you're going
to you're going to lose weight because
you're poison. You don't have to poison.
The the thing of it is is that once you
do metabolic therapy, the amount of
drugs that you would need to kill off
the tumor cells now becomes so much
less. So you're really you're really
dealing with an altogether different
physiological state. But getting back to
your really important point is when the
cancer patient goes into the clinic,
they should be uh at least told that
there are alternative options to the
treatment plan that we have been
indoctrinated to use. So I I think and
that's where we have this problem. There
is uh oneizefits-all. You you're either
you either do it my way or the highway.
And so many cancer patients email me and
say uh I asked my oncologists if he
could help me do metabolic therapy and
he says there's no evidence to support
that.
>> And I say well you got to read the
scientific literature and you have to
understand the science and then you'll
know that it works. And what's more
important you're 100% correct. Many
cancer patients would love to be
participants in their health care. They
want to know that their that their
actions are also helping them survive.
And the traditional cancer treatments we
have today takes that completely out of
their hands. They just sit there get
radiation, chemo, and whatever they're
going to give this patient with the
patient absolutely doing nothing.
>> Yeah. I mean, there's so much to unpack
there. I'm loving my conversation with
you. I think this is so important we get
this message out. But one of the
frustrations will be I'm sure for some
of the listeners or viewers on the back
of this is they'll hear this information
and maybe they have cancer or a family
member has
and they may go to their oncologist and
have this conversation and chances are
this will be shut down and it will be
like look I don't know about that stuff.
I mean, four years ago, a really close
friend of mine, his son, I think at the
age of maybe six or seven, was diagnosed
with an optical pathway glom.
And of course, very scary to, you know,
for your child to have this tumor inside
your brain.
And, you know, initially they started, I
think, down the conventional route. I
think initially
um he had a course of chemotherapy
but as my friend started to read up and
you know he went all in spent hours a
day researching the papers experts like
yourself listening and he thought wait a
minute I'm not sure about this I'm not
sure I like what's been offered versus
what I think we can do he has basically
for four years there has been no
increase in size at all and he's done it
all and to be fair I feel for he's done
it all through a huge amount of stress
he's taken on to you know seven days a
week obsessively research the literature
trying to get help not getting help from
his oncologist you know he told me
recently he said one of the first things
his oncologist said to him was oh you're
going to do the the the no sugar thing
don't worry in four weeks you'll be back
eating McDonald's they all are that's
the first thing which is a pretty um I
just don't know why or how a doctor
would say that. What what even if that's
what the doctor believes. I'm not
convinced that that has any benefit at
all uh to to saying that uh to a parent
of a child with a tumor. I mean, what
would you say to that?
>> Well, I it speaks to a profound lack of
knowledge on the part of the oncology
community.
>> And it's not just where you are. I see
it all the time here in the States as
well.
um at the Mayo Clinic uh which is
supposed to be you know a top-notch
medical center and for certain aspects
of medicine they they are but when it
comes to cancer um they they're
clueless. uh one a p one of the people
who emailed me said they went to the
Mayo Clinic with glyobblasto and one of
the the neurooncologist there said sugar
has nothing to do with glyobblasto
and I said that we we were the first to
publish a direct uh association between
glyobblasto in the mouse and how fast
the tumor uh how the sugar and how fast
sugar could make a tumor grow and then
that was replicated in humans with
glyobblasto
hypoglycemia is an accelerant to rapid
tumor growth and it's been repeated
dozens of times and now it's been shown
for almost every major cancer that the
higher the blood sugar the faster the
tumor grows. The lower the blood sugar
the slower. This has been now repeated
and yet for a person treating patients
to say that sugar has nothing to do with
glyopblasto speaks to a profound lack of
knowledge on the part of not only that
person but the entire establishment.
Another person you might want to talk to
is Pablo Kelly from Devon, England. Um
Pablo uh chose no radiation, chemo or
steroids to manage his glyobblasto.
He's still alive. eight eight almost
nine years. August will be nine years
>> and just and just and and just explain
to people how bad the prognosis is when
you have a diagnosis or when you have
glyobblasto
>> a brain tumor. It it killed John McCain
of our country, Ted Kennedy. It killed
the president Biden's son, Bo Biden. I
did the studies for for many many
decades on glyopblasto. The issue is why
is survival for glyobblasto so poor?
There's been not a single major advance
in a 100 years and I keep pointing this
out. In 1925
survival was 8 to 14 months. In 2023
survival is 8 to 17 months. So I mean
you're talking about no progress in a
100 years. Uh and what we have found
what I have found in my research is not
only is the tumor very bad, it grows it
grows rapidly. um radiation uh treatment
frees up massive amounts of glucose and
glutamine in the micro environment. When
you irdiate somebody's brain tumor, the
head swells uh the radiation for forces
blood sugar into the to the
stratosphere. And not only that, they
give you highdose steroids to reduce the
inflammation from the radiation which
raises blood sugar even higher. So
you're you're actually contributing a
micro environment rich in the two
fermentable fuels that drive the rapid
growth of the cancer. I have published
this over and over again and I said as
long as you continue to continue to
irdiate the person's brain you're never
going to achieve a a level of success
that you would expect. Now Pablo Kelly
rejected radiation. He rejected timole.
He rejected it all and went for
metabolic therapy alone. People say oh
he's only an N of one. Yeah. an N of
one. He could be the he could be the the
rule rather than the exception. But to
stop the radiation of the brain by by
onc by radiation oncologists is an
absolute essential part for incre to to
if you want to keep people alive longer.
You have to stop irdiating their tumors.
And we we have a treatment protocol that
will that will hopefully do this. But I
tell you, when you're when you are
indoctrinated and and wrapped into a
into this constant system, it's very
hard to break the habits of what you're
doing.
>> Yeah. I think that's the problem. You
know, I I genuinely believe that all
doctors, nurses, health care
professionals
are doing the best for their patients
based upon what they've been taught,
based upon what they know, based upon
the current paradigm. it and I know
you've been shouting from the rooftops
trying to shake up this paradigm and go
you know the other the other thing to
really think about here is that and I
always say this when we're talking about
nutrition changes is that look like
there's there's very little downside
here right improving your diet whatever
that means depending on what you're
doing whether it's cancer or anything
else there's no downside here right
rarely you know
>> well you know that's that's an
interesting point you'll hear some of
people in the oncology center said, "Oh,
that ketogenic diet is very dangerous.
You're going to get cardiovascular
disease or something like this." And and
I I said, "What? You got a brain tumor.
You got a glyopblastoma. You're
worried." And and and the the issues
relative, you're exactly right.
Downside. Do you think uh metabolic
therapy has more downside than toxic
radiation and poisonous chemicals?
>> Yeah.
>> I mean, give me a break. And also, what
you were saying, Thomas, before is that
you could do them both. You could use
the metabolic therapy to reduce the
cancer size, improve the health of other
cells and then use small targeted doses
which have less side effects. So it's
not either or. So Pablo Kelly you're
saying what has been alive for what
eight nine years? Is that right?
>> Yes. Yeah. And he he was given nine
month nine months to live.
>> Wow.
>> And and he said no it's all over the
English newspapers. There was many
>> where did you say he lives? Devon.
>> Devon.
>> Devon. I might I might try and get a
hold of Oh, get a hold. He's a He's a
character. He he he he can tell you what
he did. And he now he since got married,
he has two children. Uh he would have
never had any of this. So, uh um if he
had followed uh standard standard of
care would have killed him uh a long
time ago. So, he was bold. He he was
bold though. He he really fought against
uh using the standard of care despite
all the the dire prognosis that he was
given.
Thomas, one thing I I really want to
make sure we make clear, right?
You have mentioned how hyperglycemia,
so elevated blood sugar levels, is an
accelerant for tumor growth, right? And
that fits with everything we've been
talking about so far. Metabolic
dysfunction, a problem in the
mitochondria.
You know what happens when a cancer cell
is there? It no longer uh is using
oxygen appropriately. It's getting its
fuel from fermentable sources, which is
glucose and glutamine.
>> Yeah.
>> So, it makes sense when you have a
diagnosis of cancer, you may want to
reduce sugar, reduce glucose, maybe go
into ketosis. But if we shift our lens
to prevention,
of course, there are many things that
can cause cancer. We've already
mentioned that. diet, lack of exercise,
um environmental pollutants,
carcinogens, whatever it might be. Can
we say that sugar is causing cancer?
Because I think that's this where we
really need to be very careful with our
messaging, right? What what's there's
something to do with our diet as a
therapeutic intervention if we have been
diagnosed. But what if you are I don't
know in your 30s and 40s and and pretty
well and you listen to my podcast you
try and stay healthy try and make small
changes you know what's the relationship
there between sugar and cancer
>> well I I think we can never call sugar
uh a carcinogen
>> we cannot we cannot yeah
>> no sugar is not a carcinogen okay but
sugar uh creates a systemic inflammation
in the body over time C reactive protein
goes up. Now, how do we know this?
Obesity the obesity epidemic which is
now becoming worldwide in in
industrialized societies. The obesity
epidemic is the result of of the stores.
You get fat by storing carbohydrates.
You don't get fat by eating carb. That's
why you lose weight with a ketogenic
diet. You you you can't you can't store
fat. You store carbs as as fat. You
don't store fat as fat. people. This is
another tremendous mis mis uh
conception, misunderstanding. So, we
have an obesity epidemic. Obesity has
now replaced smoking as a major risk
factor for cancer. How do you get obese?
By consuming too much carbohydrate in
the diet, especially poorly nutritious
carbohydrates. Not complex carbohydrates
that you see in certain plants and in
certain grains, but you get it from
consuming those foods that have minimal
nutritional value with high levels of
processed carbohydrates. I fructose corn
syrup and all these kinds of things. Um
they are provocative to becoming obese,
elevating blood sugar. Elevated blood
sugar is an accelerant to growing tumor.
So, so clearly all of these things come
together and it's basically diet and
lifestyle. Yeah, we all would like to
prevent cancer, but when we have fast
food stores on every corner, we have
Coca-Cola. We have everything that's in
our environment that makes us feel good.
We evolved as a species to love sweets.
Our brains are geared to love sweets and
we have sweets everywhere. So, it's
again it's moderation. We try to do what
we can do to moderate our consumption of
highly processed carbohydrates and that
will reduce the risk for can not only
cancer but a lot of these diseases as
well. I think you know the the the truth
as I see it at least is that many people
are really struggling right they they do
have they either live in a food desert
where they can't get access to decent
foods they're in poverty they've had a
problematic relationship with food so I
>> I think on an individual level I think
that it's complex as to why so many
people are overweight certainly that's
my experience as a clinician
>> um but I think we can say as a society
we're not
>> really putting this front and center If
if government for example really wanted
to address
frankly beyond reducing our risk of
cancer reducing our risk of obesity and
type two diabetes you know they could uh
put in place a lot more policies for
example I don't know make sure that
there's uh affordable healthy food
>> for all of the population make sure the
food in hospitals and schools is healthy
and healthpromoting rather than health
decimating. We'll be back to the
conversation in just a moment. Now, many
of us struggle to find time to eat all
of these incredible whole foods. That's
why I'm a big fan of good quality whole
food supplements like this one that's
been in my own life for over 3 years
now. It contains over 75 whole food
source ingredients, vitamins, minerals,
pre and probiotics, and can help us
support our energy, focus, digestion,
and our immune system. AG1 are giving my
audience a fantastic offer. One year
supply of vitamin D and five free travel
packs with your first order. You can see
all details at drinkagg1.com/livemore
or just click on the link below. And now
back to the conversation. Right. So I
just want to clarify that cuz I'm sure
you would agree.
>> Oh, you're 100%. But you know, it's an
industrial thing. Uh the food industries
are extremely powerful. Uh they control
politics as well as the pharmaceutical
industries.
>> Yeah. So you have massively powerful
industries uh that um thrive on on on
the health problems of the of the
country. And you're right about food
deserts and people are stressed out and
food makes them feel better and a lot of
that food is full of carbohydrates that
puts them at risk for all these
different diseases. But the governments
could do a better job. But you know who
are the governments? They're
congressmen, senators, uh these guys.
and they get money from these different
industries to run their campaigns and
and they're not going to come out and
all of a sudden shout that we have to
reduce carbohydrates in the diet uh to
make our population healthier. Um and
the drug companies are making money hand
over fist on on all these crazy drugs
that they're giving to people. But I
think it falls on our shoulders
ourselves. Now now I can I can you're
right. I I can speak from a different
perspective than the poor guy who's
living hand-to-mouth and his his his
food can only be cheap foods that's
poorly nutritious. He can't afford the
garden variety of stuff that's more
generally more expens grass-fed beef and
all this kind of stuff. I mean, so
you're caught in a you're caught in a
between a rock and a hard place.
>> Yeah.
>> So, um yeah, these are difficult
problems that need to be addressed.
>> And two things I just wanted to finish
up on there. Um, as you mentioned
earlier on in this conversation,
you can put on weight on a ketogenic
diet if you eat too much, right? So, I
think processed carbs are absolutely uh
we're eating too much of them, but but I
think people are losing weight on a
whole variety of different diets. You
know, I guess it's for me it's a
question of what what is the whole
foodbased diet because I'm I'm
interested in weight loss and health
promotion. You can technically eat 500
calories of garbage each day and lose
weight. But I'm, you know, if you have a
whole foodbased diet, it's a case of
what can you do consistently that's
going to help you eat the right amounts.
>> Well, this is very your your point.
There's some recently within the last
month, I think, some guy lost 50 pounds
eating only McDonald's food. And and you
say, "Wow, how is that possible?" He ate
half he would order something and eat
only half of it. He he ate he in other
words he did calorie restriction
and he lost weight by just I said eating
eating food but only at half the amount
that he normally would eat. He lost
weight. He he got he he felt good but
the there was another guy who ate as
much as you could get superersized
meals. This was about 10 or 12 years ago
and that guy within a month got
cardiovascular disease obesity and every
all the other. So again, it's the amount
and types of food that uh you are
addressing to keep your body in a in a
in a state.
>> And I think the key point there to to
conclude is look, obesity is a massive
risk factor for cancer, right? That's
not trying to shame anyone. That's not
trying to have a go at anyone. It's just
trying to look at the science and and
share it.
>> I think a lot of people do not know
that.
>> Yeah, I agree.
by by you stating that you have informed
whoever is listening that obesity is a
major risk factor for cancer. So uh um
and I think a lot of people aren't aware
of that and I and I think uh that by
that statement getting out in the world
uh makes people think twice uh about
their uh weight condition.
>> Professor, it's been a real joy uh
talking to you. you I know you've been
in this field for for many decades now
and you're you're still banging the
drum. You're trying to get people to see
that there's a metabolic cause to cancer
and that maybe we need to, you know,
reook at how we view cancer and how we
treat cancer. There's plenty more we
haven't got to. Maybe I can tempt you to
a for a part two at some point in the
future. I'm pretty sure my audience are
going to love this conversation. But
just to finish off then
for people who've heard that and are
inspired to go, okay, I'm with you. I
can see how poor metabolism, metabolic
dysfunction, mitochondrial dysfunction
is going to increase my risk of getting
cancer. What can I do right now? I don't
have cancer, but I want to reduce my
risk of getting it in the future. I
wonder if you could share some of your
top tips for people as to what they can
actually practically do. Well, I think
exercise is absolutely essential. Um,
keeping your because bringing oxygen
into your blood, having good blood flow
increases uh physiological function. If
you can reduce the amounts of high
carbohydrate foods that you eat with
exercise and occasionally look at your
GKI, your glucose ketone index, uh
you're going to ward off not only cancer
but probably type two diabetes,
cardiovascular disease, and even
dementia. So, uh, all of these things
are linked to a common problem in in
disturbed metabolic homeostasis. So, um,
so I think there are definitely things
people can do and it's hard when you're
sitting in traffic, uh, traffic jams and
then you have to rush up and sit in
front of your computer and or in an
office somewhere. So, all of these
things are not consistent with our
evolutionary origins. But I think if
people have become aware of these
things, at least they can in their own
lives try to adjust adjust their their
their situation to to recognize this.
>> And sleep, chronic stress, these sort of
things.
>> Well, that's another thing, too.
Sleeping, you know, good sleep. Yeah.
Right. Who who wouldn't like to have
that? Uh yeah,
stress. What do you do for stress? You
know, I mean, we're all stressed out.
People was used to smoke like crazy to
reduce stress. now they stopped smoking
and now they got fat and now they they
got this they're back in the same spot
for a different reason. Yeah. So, uh you
know, it's just it's just um
>> but but the po but the point is is that
all of these things really do make a
real difference at reducing your risk of
cancer in the future.
>> Yeah, absolutely. Absolutely.
>> And maybe this is just a little teaser
for the next time we talk. You mentioned
earlier on that intermittent hypoxia is
one of the things that can drive the
mitochondrial dysfunction. I wanted to
really expand what you meant by that.
Did you mean obstructive sleep apnnea,
things like that? Because you also
because you then mentioned exercise as
being a way of delivering more oxygen,
>> right? Yeah. No, that's what Warberg
even showed that it was intermittent
hypoxia that he thought was responsible
for the majority of cancers. We we've
expanded upon that and we've shown the
mechanisms by which that can happen. So
yeah, that's another story. I mean,
we've done we've done a lot of uh uh
research and and we recognize these
things and and intermittent hypoxia can
be prevented by by uh oxygenation and
exercise and eating the right foods. So
again, you're coming back to a similar
kind of thing.
>> Well, we'll get to that in our next
conversation hopefully. But just to
finish off then, are you hopeful? Are
you hopeful that we can do something
different to make an impact in our rates
of cancer?
>> Oh, absolutely. I mean absolutely and
Warberg even said that we could reduce
80% of our cancers and I believe that if
we but now we we have a plan we know
what's going on. We have an
understanding of the mechanism by which
cancer occurs and we really understand
how we can manage it. The problem is
getting that to be adapted in the uh in
the clinics and and the education that
requires uh in the medical schools uh to
train the physician that diet lifestyle
issues are really important for managing
uh chronic diseases and here is the
strategy and and protocols for doing
that and that's I think will be the
future.
>> Well, professor, thank you for your
tireless work. Thank you for giving up
some time. Thank you for coming on the
show.
>> Yeah, very nice. Thank you very much for
having